feat: KafkaProxy threading and lifecycle contract (#98)
kroxylicious/design: proposals/098-kafkaproxy-threading-and-lifecycle.md

# Proposal 019: KafkaProxy Threading and Lifecycle Contract

## Summary

Define the threading and lifecycle contract for `KafkaProxy`: it is a single-use object with a linear lifecycle (`NEW` -> `STARTING` -> `STARTED` -> `STOPPING` -> `STOPPED`). Both `startup()` and `shutdown()` are idempotent — they may be called multiple times, but only one call performs the work.

## Current Situation

> 

Reviewer: I think it's worth calling out that `KafkaProxy` is **not** public API.

Formalising the contract provides:

- **Correctness**: the only genuinely invalid sequence (start-after-stop) is detected and rejected. All other repeated or concurrent calls are idempotent.
- **Guidance for implementors**: components within the proxy can choose appropriate synchronisation strategies based on documented guarantees rather than assumptions.
- **A foundation for [016](./016-virtual-cluster-lifecycle.md)**: the virtual cluster lifecycle sits inside the proxy lifecycle. Defining the outer contract first avoids circular reasoning.

## Proposal

### KafkaProxy is Single-Use

A `KafkaProxy` instance follows a linear, non-repeatable lifecycle:

```
NEW  ──>  STARTING  ──>  STARTED  ──>  STOPPING  ──>  STOPPED
                │                                        ▲

>                 └──────────  (startup failure)  ─────────┘

Reviewer: This explains the conceptual model, but do you anticipate whether these states will (eventually) be exposed via a public API. Metrics or the mgmt server, for example? Should this proposal define how they relate to the health endpoints?

The lifecycle is **not restartable**. Once a proxy reaches `STOPPED`, it cannot return to any earlier state. To restart, create a new `KafkaProxy` instance. This holds across all deployment models: standalone, Kubernetes, sidecar, and embedded library.

Dynamic configuration reload handles changes within a running proxy; there is no use case for tearing down and re-creating Netty event loops in-process.

### `startup()` Returns a Future

`startup()` returns a `CompletableFuture<Void>` that completes when the proxy reaches `STOPPED`. This lets the caller decide how to wait:

```java
// Standalone — block the main thread until shutdown
proxy.startup().join();

// Embedded / tests — start and hold the future
var stopped = proxy.startup();
// ... do other work ...
stopped.join();
```

> 

Reviewer: You've not said anything about the exceptional completion of the future. In particular, if the proxy cannot start up will the future complete with an exception, or will it complete normally (because according to your assertion that there is no `FAILED` state we have reached the `STOPPED` state)?

If `startup()` fails partway through, the proxy transitions directly to `STOPPED` — partially-acquired resources are released before the exception propagates. There is no `FAILED` state at the proxy level; a failed startup is simply a proxy that went straight to `STOPPED`. This is intentional for two reasons: the proxy is not reconfigurable, so there is no recovery transition from a hypothetical `FAILED` state (unlike virtual clusters, which support `failed` -> `initializing` for retry with corrected configuration); and the failure is communicated directly to the caller via the exception from `startup()`, so there is no need to hold the error in state for later inspection.

The lifecycle is **not restartable**. Once a proxy reaches `STOPPED`, it cannot return to any earlier state. To restart, create a new `KafkaProxy` instance. This holds across all deployment models: standalone and Kubernetes today, and sidecar or embedded library if those models are supported in the future.

Dynamic configuration reload handles changes within a running proxy; there is no use case for tearing down and re-creating Netty event loops in-process.

### `startup()` Returns a Future

> 

Reviewer: I think this section would be clearer if you at least started by laying out the signatures of the relevant lifecycle methods of `KafkaProxy`: `startup()`, `shutdown()` and `block()`. I think it might even just be simpler to show the javadoc for the contract you're proposing.

Author: The API surface is captured in the Threading Contract table and the Lifecycle Future section — method names, return types, and behaviour for each call sequence. Javadoc will be the definitive specification in the implementation; keeping it out of the proposal avoids duplicating it and lets the proposal stay at the contract level.

The proxy should expose:

- **State gauge**: a metric indicating the current lifecycle state (`starting`, `started`, `stopping`, `stopped`). This gives dashboards and alerts a definitive signal rather than requiring inference from Kubernetes-level indicators.
- **Startup duration**: time elapsed from `STARTING` to `STARTED` (or failure). This helps operators identify configuration or environment issues that slow startup across restarts.

These metrics are public API surface — once exposed, their names and semantics become a compatibility commitment. The specific metric names and labelling conventions should be consistent with any metrics framework adopted for virtual cluster lifecycle ([016](./016-virtual-cluster-lifecycle.md)).

## Affected/Not Affected Projects

**Affected:**

> - **kroxylicious-proxy (runtime)**: `KafkaProxy` gains a formal lifecycle contract. `startup()` returns a `CompletableFuture<Void>`. `block()` is deprecated.

Reviewer 2: as block is an internal API, we could just kill it.

> # 98 - Proposal 019: KafkaProxy Threading and Lifecycle Contract

Reviewer 2: FIx the proposal number in the title.

## Summary

> Define the threading and lifecycle contract for `KafkaProxy`: it is a single-use object with a linear lifecycle (`NEW` -> `STARTING` -> `STARTED` -> `STOPPING` -> `STOPPED`). `startup()` returns a single `CompletableFuture<Void>` representing the full proxy lifetime — it completes only when the proxy reaches `STOPPED`. Both `startup()` and `shutdown()` are idempotent — they may be called multiple times, but only one call performs the work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Define the threading and lifecycle contract for `KafkaProxy`: it is a single-use object with a linear lifecycle (`NEW` -> `STARTING` -> `STARTED` -> `STOPPING` -> `STOPPED`). `startup()` will always return the same `CompletableFuture<Void>` representing the full proxy lifetime — it completes only when the proxy reaches `STOPPED`. Both `startup()` and `shutdown()` are idempotent — they may be called multiple times, but only one call performs the work.
```

Formalising the contract provides:

- **Correctness**: the only genuinely invalid sequence (start-after-stop) is detected and rejected. All other repeated or concurrent calls are idempotent.
- **Guidance for Kroxylicious developers**: components within the proxy can choose appropriate synchronisation strategies based on documented guarantees rather than assumptions.
- **A foundation for [016](./016-virtual-cluster-lifecycle.md)**: the virtual cluster lifecycle sits inside the proxy lifecycle. Defining the outer contract first avoids circular reasoning.

## Proposal

### KafkaProxy is Single-Use

A `KafkaProxy` instance follows a linear, non-repeatable lifecycle:

```
NEW  ──>  STARTING  ──>  STARTED  ──>  STOPPING  ──>  STOPPED
                │                                        ▲
                └──────────  (startup failure)  ─────────┘
```

- **NEW**: constructed, not yet started.
- **STARTING**: `startup()` is in progress.
- **STARTED**: the proxy is serving traffic.
- **STOPPING**: `shutdown()` is in progress. The caller may join the future returned by `startup()` to wait for completion.
- **STOPPED**: terminal. All resources released.

> If `startup()` fails partway through, the proxy transitions directly to `STOPPED` — partially-acquired resources are released before returning a failed future. There is no `FAILED` state at the proxy level; a failed startup is simply a proxy that went straight to `STOPPED`. This is intentional for two reasons: the proxy is not reconfigurable, so there is no recovery transition from a hypothetical `FAILED` state (unlike virtual clusters, which support `failed` -> `initializing` for retry with corrected configuration); and the failure is communicated directly to the caller via the future's exceptional completion, so there is no need to hold the error in state for later inspection.

Reviewer 2: > If `startup()` fails partway through, the proxy transitions directly to `STOPPED` — partially-acquired resources are released before returning a failed future. 

The startup future will have already been returned to the caller.  I think you might mean something like: "partially-acquired resources are released before the startup future is failed exceptionally. "
